Proposal: Modification of Receive Split proposal. (#4036)
thanos-io/thanos: docs/proposals/202012_receive_split.md

### Goals

* Reduce downtime of the ingestion logic in Thanos Receiver

### Proposal

We propose allowing to run Thanos Receiver in a mode that only forwards/replicates remote write (distributor mode). You can enable that mode by simply not specifying:

```yaml
  --receive.local-endpoint=RECEIVE.LOCAL-ENDPOINT
                                 Endpoint of local receive node. Used to
                                 identify the local node in the hashring
                                 configuration.
```

> We can call this mode a "Routing Receiver". Similarly, we can skip specify any hashring to Thanos Receiver (`--receive.hashrings-file=<path>`), explicitly purposing it only for ingesting. We can call this mode "Ingesting Receiver".

Reviewer: Grammar nit:
```suggestion
We can call this mode a "Routing Receiver". Similarly, we can skip specifying any hashring to Thanos Receiver (`--receive.hashrings-file=<path>`), explicitly purposing it only for ingesting. We can call this mode "Ingesting Receiver".
```

This allows us to (optionally) model deployment in a way that avoid expensive re-configuration of the stateful ingesting Receivers after the hashring configuration file has changed.

In comparison to previous proposal (as mentioned in [alternatives](#previous-proposal-separate-receive-route-command) we have big adventages:

1. We can reduce number of components in Thanos system, we can reuse similar component flags and documentation. Users has to learn about one less command and in result Thanos design is much more approachable. Less components mean less maintainance, code and other implicit duties: Separate changelogs, issue confusions, boilerplates, etc.
2. Allow consistent pattern with Query. We don't have separate StoreAPI component for proxying, we have that baked into Querier. This has been proven to be flexible and understandable, so I would like to propose similar pattern in Receiver.
3. This is more future proof for potential advanced cases like chain of routers -> receivers -> routers -> receivers for federated writes, so trees with depth n.

### Plan

> * Receiver without `--receive.hashrings` does not forward or replicate requests, it routes straight to multi-tsdb.

Reviewer 2: Not sure about this suggestion, just that the old statement sounded contrapositive 😆  
```suggestion
* Receiver with `--receive.hashrings` forwards or replicate requests, without this, it would route the request straight to multi-tsdb.
```

Reviewer 2: Resolved during office hours :)

> * Receiver without ` --Receiver.local-endpoint` will assume that no storage is needed, so will skip creating any resources for multi TSDB.

Reviewer 2: Similar to above
```suggestion
* Receiver with ` --receiver.local-endpoint` would create storage for multi TSDB, without this flag, we will skip creating any resources for multi TSDB.
```

Reviewer 2: Resolved during office hours :)

* Add changes to the documentation (it's simplistic now). Mention two modes.

### Alternative Solutions

#### Previous Proposal: Separate receive-route command

> 1. Split the Receiver component into receive-route and Receiver (and ensure ease of resharding events).
> 1. Evaluate any effects on performance by simulating scenarios and collecting and analyzing metrics.
> 1. Use consistent hashing to avoid reshuffling time series after resharding events. The exact consistent hashing mechanism to be used needs some further research.
> 1. Migration: We document how the new architecture can be set up to have the same general deployment of the old architecture. (We run router and Receiver on the same node).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Split the Receiver component into receive-route and Receiver (and ensure ease of resharding events).
2. Evaluate any effects on performance by simulating scenarios and collecting and analyzing metrics.
3. Use consistent hashing to avoid reshuffling time series after resharding events. The exact consistent hashing mechanism to be used needs some further research.
4. Migration: We document how the new architecture can be set up to have the same general deployment of the old architecture. (We run router and Receiver on the same node).
```

> This potentially makes the receiver more difficult to operate and understand for Thanos users. I would argue this is howerver much more harder in overall Thanos deployment. Otherwise this option is exactly the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This potentially makes the receiver more difficult to operate and understand for Thanos users. I would argue this is however much harder in overall Thanos deployment. Otherwise, this option is exactly the same.
```

### Related Tickets

* Hashring improvements: https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/issues/3141
* Previous proposal implementations: https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/pull/3845, https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/pull/3580
* Distribution idea: https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/pull/2675

### Summary

This document describes the motivation and design of running Receive in a stateless mode that does not have capabilities to store samples, it only routes remote write

> to further receives based on hashring. This allows setting optional deployment model were only Routing Receives are using hashring files and does the routing and replication. That allows ingesting Receivers to not handle any routing or hashring, only receiving multi tenant writes.

Reviewer 2: Should it be `receives` or `receiver`? I am getting confused :(
```suggestion
to another receiver based on hashring. This allows setting optional deployment model were only Routing Receives are using hashring files and does the routing and replication. That allows ingesting Receivers to not handle any routing or hashring, only receiving multi tenant writes.
```

Reviewer 2: Because out here in this line - `That allows ingesting Receivers to not handle any routing or hashring, only receiving multi tenant writes.`, we use `receiver` :)

Author: You are right: It should be "Receiver": https://thanos.io/tip/contributing/contributing.md/#components-naming

### Motivation

[@squat](https://github.com/squat):

> Currently, any change to the hashring configuration file will trigger all Thanos Receive nodes to flush their multi-TSDBs, causing them to enter an unready state until the flush is complete. This unavailability during a flush allows for a clear state transition, however it can result in downtimes on the order of five minutes for every configuration change. Moreover, during configuration changes, the hashring goes through an even longer period of partial unreadiness, where some nodes begin and finish flushing before and after others. During this partial unreadiness, the hashring can expect high internal request failure rates, which cause clients to retry their requests, resulting in even higher load. Therefore, when the hashring configuration is changed due to automatic horizontal scaling of a set of Thanos Receivers, the system can expect higher than normal resource utilization, which can create a positive feedback loop that continuously scales the hashring.

### Goals

> * Reduce the downtime of ingestion part of Thanos

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Reduce downtime of the ingestion operation of Thanos Receiver
```

Author: Hm, wonder if operation is a right word 🤔

Author: changed to `logic`

User can also mix all of those two modes for various federated hashrings etc. So instead of what we had before:

![Before](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/e/2PACX-1vTfko27YB_3ab7ZL8ODNG5uCcrpqKxhmqaz3lW-yhGN3_oNxkTrqXmwwlcZjaWf3cGgAJIM4CMwwkEV/pub?w=960&h=720)

We have:

![After](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/e/2PACX-1vTVrtCGjR4iMbrU7Kj6QAn1a1m4fr-kvoQVDAK4lzQ_wWfXfpLLEE9HB948-WHI5ZG6s1iGWt51R593/pub?w=960&h=720)

This allows us to (optionally) model deployment in a way that avoid expensive re-configuration of the stateful ingesting Receives after the hashring configuration file has changed.

In comparison to previous proposal (as mentioned in [alternatives](#previous-proposal-separate-receive-route-command) we have big adventages:

1. We can reduce number of components in Thanos system, we can reuse similar component flags and documentation. Users has to learn about one less command and in result Thanos design is much more approachable. Less components mean less maintainance, code and other implicit duties: Separate changelogs, issue confusions, boilerplates, etc.

> 2. Allow consistent pattern with Query. We don't have separate StorAPI component for proxying, we have that baked into Querier. This has been proven to be flexible and understandable, so I would like to propose similar pattern in Receive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Allow consistent pattern with Query. We don't have separate StoreAPI component for proxying, we have that baked into Querier. This has been proven to be flexible and understandable, so I would like to propose similar pattern in Receive.
```

> 3. This is more future proof for potential advanced cases like chain of routers -> receives -> routers -> receives for federated writes.

Author: ```suggestion
3. This is more future proof for potential advanced cases like chain of routers -> receives -> routers -> receives for federated writes, so trees with depth n.
```

### Open Questions

* Buffering the incoming requests.

### Plan

> * Receive without `--receive.hashrings` does not forward or replicate requests, it routes straight to multi-tsdb.

Reviewer 2: So by **_not using a flag_** we enforce a certain behaviour, shouldn't we use a flag to enforce what we want?

Author: Well that's the thing. If you don't use hashring flag, it's by design impossible to do hashring forwarding, because you did not specify hashring, right? (:  That's why we can use it as quite explicit turn off of forwarding logic, no?

### Motivation

[@squat](https://github.com/squat):

> Currently, any change to the hashring configuration file will trigger all Thanos Receive nodes to flush their multi-TSDBs, causing them to enter an unready state until the flush is complete. This unavailability during a flush allows for a clear state transition, however it can result in downtimes on the order of five minutes for every configuration change. Moreover, during configuration changes, the hashring goes through an even longer period of partial unreadiness, where some nodes begin and finish flushing before and after others. During this partial unreadiness, the hashring can expect high internal request failure rates, which cause clients to retry their requests, resulting in even higher load. Therefore, when the hashring configuration is changed due to automatic horizontal scaling of a set of Thanos Receivers, the system can expect higher than normal resource utilization, which can create a positive feedback loop that continuously scales the hashring.

### Goals

> * Be able to run component that just does remote write forwarding part of Receive and can be part of hashring.

Author: I think this is still suggesting the implementation.

```
* Reduce the downtime of ingestion part of Thanos
```

User can also mix all of those two modes for various federated hashrings etc. So instead of what we had before:

![Before](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/e/2PACX-1vTfko27YB_3ab7ZL8ODNG5uCcrpqKxhmqaz3lW-yhGN3_oNxkTrqXmwwlcZjaWf3cGgAJIM4CMwwkEV/pub?w=960&h=720)

We have:

![After](https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/e/2PACX-1vTVrtCGjR4iMbrU7Kj6QAn1a1m4fr-kvoQVDAK4lzQ_wWfXfpLLEE9HB948-WHI5ZG6s1iGWt51R593/pub?w=960&h=720)

This allows us to (optionally) model deployment in a way that avoid expensive re-configuration of the stateful ingesting Receives after the hashring configuration file has changed.

In comparison to previous proposal (as mentioned in [alternatives](#previous-proposal-separate-receive-route-command) we have big adventages:

1. We can reduce number of components in Thanos system, we can reuse similar component flags and documentation. Users has to learn about one less command and in result Thanos design is much more approachable. Less components mean less maintainance, code and other implicit duties: Separate changelogs, issue confusions, boilerplates, etc.

> 2. Allow consistent pattern with Query. We don't have separate StorAPI component for proxying, we have that baked into Querier. This has been proven to be flexible and understandable, so I would like to propose similar pattern in Receive.

Reviewer 3: 👍

3. This is more future proof for potential advanced cases like chain of routers -> receives -> routers -> receives for federated writes.

### Open Questions

> * Buffering the incoming requests.

Author: I just inherited this from the previous proposal. Any ideas what was that about?

Reviewer 3: cc @Chans321 @squat @brancz

Author: Looks like no idea anymore. Removing then.

1. Split the receive component into receive-route and receive (and ensure ease of resharding events).
1. Evaluate any effects on performance by simulating scenarios and collecting and analyzing metrics.
1. Use consistent hashing to avoid reshuffling time series after resharding events. The exact consistent hashing mechanism to be used needs some further research.
1. Migration: We document how the new architecture can be set up to have the same general deployment of the old architecture. (We run router and receiver on the same node).

*Pros:*

1. Splitting functionality can be used to make resharding events easier.
2. Right now the receiver handles ingestion, routing and writing, thus leading to too many responsibilities in a single process.
   This also makes the receiver more difficult to operate and understand for Thanos users.
   Splitting the receiver component into two different components could potentially have the following benefits:
   1. Resharding events become faster and cause no downtime in ingestion.
   2. Deployment becomes easier to understand for Thanos users.
   3. Each component consists of less code.

*Cons:*

> There is no possible way to have a single-process receiver. The user must have a router + a receiver running.

Reviewer 4: If this is the only con, then there are simple solutions to solve this.

Author: This is left overall, sorry, will be more explicit

Author: I clarified, could you double check?
